Hello test.How are you?
Hi, I am Dr Chao-Yo Cheng. Welcome to Advanced Topics in
Quantitative Social Research.
In this video, I'll provide a practical overview of multiple
linear regression building on what you have learned so far at
Birkbeck.
I will start by using bivariate regression to go over
the core concepts and mathematical properties of
linear regression model.
I am also going to explain how, as quantitative social
researchers, we can view the data analytical objectives of linear
regression differently and how these different perspectives will
accordingly influence our understanding and reading of the
results we get from conducting linear regression analysis.
Our review of linear regression model will then briefly cover
the key assumptions we need, as well as the main principles of
statistical inference when it comes to linear regression.
Next, I'm going to discuss the underlying rationale for
multiple linear regression.
We're going to talk about a number of questions, for
instance, why has multiple linear regression become the most
common way of understanding the social world among quantitative
social researchers? what issues do we have to take into
consideration when we try to build a multi linear regression
model?
I'm going to end this part by discussing some basic principles
we can take to design and implement linear regression
analysis.
The most important key takeaway from this lecture is to
recognize
All statistical models are only approximations of the reality.
There is no perfect statistical model, although we do have some
theoretical principles we can use to guide our decisions, such
as
how do we choose between different variables and how do we choose
different model specifications
And yet for quantitative social researchers, we still need to
make a lot of decisions. We still have to take a lot of
assumptions.
And very often the decisions we have to make may not have a
clear or compelling reason.
or foundation.
After all, as George Box put, all models are wrong, but
some of them are useful.
Box is one of the most important statisticians of all time, and
this line has become one of the most important motto for all
quantitative researchers.
Alright. So let's begin.
Regression analysis is a very common statistical technique
because it allows us to describe and estimate the relationship
between different factors over variables in the social world or
human society.
Linear regression model.
is only one kind of regression techniques we can use.
But it is perhaps the most widely used model estimator
because it provides us with a very straightforward and
intuitive framework to achieve a lot of things.
In particular, linear regression allows us to use a linear
function to present the
relationship between X and Y, namely our predictor and
outcome variable.
Consider the linear function I put here.
We're going to talk more about multiple linear regression in a
moment, but let us focus on bivariate linear regression
because the basic ideas can be extended to multiple linear
regression.
By definition bivariate linear regression only has one
predictor or independent variable.
In the linear function, we can use X to represent the predictor
and Y to represent the outcome over dependent variable of
interest. Some researchers, like psychologists, sometimes also
call Y the response variable of X.
For this particular linear function, we can also say Y
is a function of X because we can use the value of X to infer
or derive the corresponding value of Y. Suppose we know the
value of alpha and beta.
So now you know some basic setup.
of a linear function or a linear model. We can now go over other
parts in a linear function more carefully.
When we carry our linear regression analysis, the idea is
to use one or more predictors or independent variables to predict
the value of Y.
Once we use our data to derive or estimate the values of
intercept and the slope, then we can use the data we have to
predict Y.
Most specifically speaking,m
On the right hand side, you can see there is an
error term at the end,
which is something we use to capture the random noise that
otherwise cannot be captured given our predictors or current
model setup.
For instance, if you want to come out with a model to predict
someone's income, a person's luck may or can only be included using
the error term unless we can come up with a systematic and
reliable and replicable measure of luck.
Formerly speaking the error or disturbance, is defined as the
difference
or distance between the actual and predicted outcome values.
If we put the error term aside, in the same function, we can also
see the model is defined by the intercept and the slope in
addition to the predictor and outcome variable.
On the one hand, the intercept of a linear function will tell us
the corresponding value of Y when we set the value of X at
zero.
The slope, on the other hand.
indicates the corresponding change and the value of Y when
we increase the value of X by one, say from zero to one.
You will see this more clearly in the next slide.
So in this slide, you can see what a typical bivariate linear
regression model looks like.
This model uses beta zero and one to represent the intercept
and the slope, respectively.
The figure is very helpful because it clearly shows where
the intercept is located.
Once again, they intercept is the value of our dependent variable
when we set the value of our predictor at zero.
The slope or beta one shows the corresponding changes in Y over
changes in X.
When the denominator is one, then the slope again tells us
how much our dependent variable will change when we increase the
value of our predictor by one unit.
Here is a more realistic example of a bivariate linear
regression.
What we have here is a scatter plot containing both the
predictor on the horizontal axis and the dependent variable on
the vertical axis.
The predictor in this case is voters' perception of competence
for politicians from the Democratic Party in the US.
The competence score is constructed by the researchers
ranging between zero and one, with higher value suggesting
higher perceived competence.
The dependent variable is how much percentage of votes
democratic candidates can win relative to the vote share of
their Republican competitors.
Each small circle in a scatter plot represents an
observation, and you should be able to see that the unit of
observations in the data set is a democratic candidate in the
election.
Suppose now we carry out linear regression analysis and are
using some data collecting from the previous elections.
And we use the data to derive the estimated coefficients for
the intercept and the slope.
Looking at the regression line, given that a slope is
positive, it is apparent that Democratic politicians can win
more votes relative to their Republican rivals, when voters
consider these Democratic candidates more competent.
This scatter plot also shows where the intercept is located, right?
Since the intercept is negative, it tells us
when voters consider democratic politicians having no competence
at all, they will lose votes against the Republican
politicians -- a lot.
In the same scatter plot, you can see there is a small hat
above alpha.
This is a very common notation we use to represent some
statistical metric
estimated based on the data we have.
The standard way to read alpha hat here is "the estimated
intercept."
Likewise, in the scatter plot, you can also see the authors use
one of the data points or observations to remind us of
what a residual really means. We can also see small hats being
placed above a predicted Y and residual epsilon. Residual can
also be understood, as a result,
as the estimated error or a estimated disturbance.
Some researchers have a more nuanced understanding of the
definitions of error and residual, and I will explain
this more carefully in class.
Before I move on, here's one very interesting mathematical fact of
regression line You may have noticed: The mean or average
values of the predictor and the dependent variable will always
fall on the regression line.
Again linear regression is a very convenient technique for us
to infer the statistical relationship between the outcome
and the predictors of our choice.
To summarize our discussions so far, the main objective of
using linear regression is twofold.
First, linear regression is a statistical technique; we can use
a linear function to represent correlation or causation
between our predictors and outcome variable.
This is probably way too obvious, but still this is a very
important thing to keep in mind. Second, and this is where
things become more interesting.
The least squares linear regression will allow us to
estimate the values of intercept and the slopes with some
desirable properties.
I will discuss these properties in a moment, but before I do
that, we need to discuss some addition and nuances when it
comes to linear regression.
You may have heard researchers use different names to call X
and Y. So far, we have been using predictor to call X, but doing so
actually implies
an interesting assumption about why we need a linear regression
and what we use linear regression for.
First,
also in line with scholars who invented the basic techniques of
linear regression about a hundred years ago, we can use
linear regression module for the purpose of forecasting.
Using the same casewe have just gone through in the previous
slide, it is very tempting that we can use voters' perception of
politicians' competence to predict how these politicians
will perform in the elections.
Of course, this is a very unrealistic
scenario, right? because
a politician's vote or performance in the elections.
is by no means just a simple function of
a single factor or variable
Sometimes elections may just be influenced by random disturbance
that we do not know or factors we really cannot major tangibly.
For instance, in the case of Japan, a lot of people say, you
know, the leading part is what share will be determined
actually by the waiter on the voting day, if there is.
if there's some rain or if the weather is not
permitting -- a lot of people would not just go to vote and as
a result the leading party is more likely to lose.
In any case, if you believe the main objective of linear
regression is forecasting, then X should be understood as the
predictor of our outcome or dependent variable.
Similarly,
Some researchers believe we can use linear regression to "explain"
the outcome of our interest. Using the same same example from
the previous slide. We can say it may as well be the case that a
politician's competence may not reliably predict how many votes
they are going to get, but it does help researchers explain
their performance in the elections.
In this case, we do not really care much about using perception
of competence as a predictor, but we can treat this as one of the
key factors we can use to understand voting behaviors in
democratic elections.
In this case,
X is better to be understood as an explanatory variable.
Before I move on to the discussion on the statistical
inference of linear regression, I want to make two additional
points.
First again, the slope we
estimate using different regression techniques, including
the least squares is only one way for us to measure the
correlation or the quantify the correlation between X and Y.
And also with certain assumptions or under some
conditions, the slope.
can tell us the causal effect of X on Y.
We will talk more about this later this term, especially
after Reading Week. But in the field of causal inference, X is
usually understood as the causal or treatment variable.
Now, given that we're all clear about a basic setup and the data
analytical objectives of linear regression, it is time to address
a number of questions regarding statistical inference. That
is, how do we estimate the intercept and the slope using
the data we have?
How can we know to intercept and slopes We estimate based on the
data we have are the best at once? And what can we really
learn from our regression coefficients for the intercept
and slopes?
The ordinary least squares or OLS
is one of the most common techniques we use
to estimate the intercept and slopes. The intercept and slopes
estimated using OLS have some very nice properties and one of
the most important properties is
OLS can produce unbiased point estimates or regression
coefficients.
Which means OLS can give us the estimated intercept and
slopes close to the real one.
At least theoretical speaking.
Remember our data is always a sample of some well defined or
unknown underlying population and with some assumptions or conditions
we can be more or less certain that
the estimated intercept and slopes produced by OLS will
be very similar to, if not exactly identical with, the true
intercept and slopes that we will never know for sure.
So the first condition linearity.
is very straightforward and self-explanatory.
To use linear regression is to say, we assume there is a linear
relationship between X and Y.
Next, we need the error of each observation to be independent
from each other.
For instance, if we are trying to use the number of hours students
study for a school test to predict their performance in the
test, then the residual or the estimated error of one
particular student should not depend on the residuals of other
students.
And that should be the case for every single student in the data
set.
Moreover, we also need the value of actual Y to be normally
distributed across different levels
or values of X -- that is, the value of actual Y recorded in
our data set, given a specific value or level of X, should be
included in a corresponding normal distribution of Y at the
same value
or level of X.
Finally,
We also need the variance or standard error of our Y to be equal
across different values or levels of the predictor.
In a textbook, the call this condition "equal variance" and a
more technical term for that is homoscedasticity .
So keep in mind, before I continue,
These are the conditions for the estimated regression
coefficients
to be unbiased, which means they are close to or nearly the same
as the true ones in the population.
The conditions we have gone through above do not necessarily
allow OLS to produce efficient coefficients or point estimates
for the intercept and slopes.
To say a point estimate or a regression coefficient is
efficient is to say these coefficients or estimates have a
relatively small variance or a standard error, and the variance
or standard error of our coefficients or estimates
usually
has more to do with the statistical power of our
analysis or the sample size. Very often
we can reduce the variance or standard error of our regression
estimates by increasing our sample size.
This scatter plot summarizes the conditions we have listed in the
previous slide.
Again, this is a bivariate linear regression, each small black dot in the
scatter plot is a data point or observation.
The thick blue straight line says the values of Y can be
approximated by the linear function of X, which is the
linearity assumption.
Next, although it is a bit hard to see here, the distance between
each black dot and the blue regression line does not have a
clear pattern or certainly does not depend on each other. That
is, the residual of one observation has nothing to do
with the residual of another observation.
This condition is the independence assumption.
Furthermore, you can see across different levels of X the values
of Y follow the same normal distribution and the red curves
in the scatter plot show the normality distribution.
Finally, given that these.
actual Y follow the same normal distribution at the same mean
values as we increase the value of X, it means the errors have
the same variance or send the error across different levels or
value of X.
This is the homoscedasticity assumption.
The reason was to say
this is because a normal distribution is defined by its
mean and variance. To say two normal distributions at
different mean value are identical is also saying they
have the same variance.
To summarize our discussions about these assumptions is
is to say -- to remind you, often scholars will combine the
independence, normality and homoscedastic assumptions to
say the outcome variable of Y must be independently and
identically normally distributed across all levels and values of
the predictor, which is the case we see here. This is known as the
i.i.d. condition.
So these assumptions and conditions are surely important
as we hope to obtain unbiased estimates for the intercept and
slopes of our linear regression model. But I want to make one
thing clear, the violation of these assumptions is by no means
the end of the world.
As you can see here
econometricians, statistician and quant researchers in other
fields
have spent a lot of effort developing different statistical
techniques we can use to correct or adjust our estimates or standard
errors when one or more assumptions are not satisfied.
For instance, generalized linear models can be quite useful if
our data do not follow
the linearity assumption.
So after all,
The relationship between X and Y is not those linear -- it just part
of the real life.
There are also other statistical tools we can use to relax other
assumptions when we conduct regression analysis.
For this module, we will not have time to cover all these
techniques.
But if necessary, you are very welcome to request additional
tutorials and references if you are interested in any of these
particular techniques.
Now we are clear about the
assumptions at this time for us
to discuss the more important
issues of.
Regression analysis, how do we obtain useful information from
our analysis? Sure, the regression analysis, especially least
squares, may produce unbiased regression coefficients.
But it is still very crucial for us to review some of the key
principles when it comes to the task of statistical inferences.
In this lecture, I'm going to focus on two issues related to
statistical inference of least squares linear regression.
One concerns the question of statistical significance and the
other is about a question of regression model fit.
First, after we carry out any linear regression analysis,
including OLS, we are keen to find out if the point estimate
or regression coefficient is significant or not. Given that
the intercept usually does not deliver much substantive
implications. At this moment, we are going to focus more on the
regression coefficient for the estimated slope, namely beta.
To determine whether the estimate of slope is statistically
significant, we will have to conduct hypothesis testing. You should
have learned the underlying rationale and procedures of
hypothesis testing in other modules by this moment. But just
as a reminder, the hypothesis testing for OLS is a two tailed
test.
As we want to use OLS to estimate the slope or the
correlation between X and Y the null hypothesis is always beta
equals zero.
And the alternative hypothesis will be beta is not zero.
By saying our estimated slope or regression coefficient for beta
is statistically significant is basically to say
the regression coefficient is statistically different from
zero for us to say we can reject the null hypothesis.
To determine whether our estimated betas are
statistically significant in this case,
we can either use p-value or confidence intervals.
If you use the p-value, which is defined as the conditional
probability that
we observe the pattern or the regression coefficient based on
the data given the null hypothesis is true, we'll need this
probability to be really, really, really low for us
to say the null hypothesis is so unlikely that we have to reject
it, and as you may know, the conventional threshold for P
value is .05.
If you think the idea of p-value is very convoluted, which is very
much of the case,
the alternative to find out
Whether or not beta is significant is to use confidence
intervals.
We'll have to assume the sampling distribution of our
regression coefficient to be normal and the user standard
error of these coefficients to construct the intervals. The key
idea here is to make sure our confidence intervals, which
show the range of our point estimates and regression
coefficients, does not include zero so we can reject the null
hypothesis that
beta equal zero.
Before I continue, I want to make one thing very, very clear.
Statistical significance is neither the only or the most crucial
aspect of regression analysis. In addition to statistical
significance, we should also pay attention to the sign
and the size of our regression coefficient.
A statistically significant coefficient for the slope may be
so small that in the end, our predictor only has a trivial
correlation or causal impact on the outcome variable.
So, in addition to statistical significance, we should also pay
attention to the question of model fit.
There are many different techniques we can use to
evaluate if the proposed model is a good fit.
And which one we should use will demand a clear conceptualization
and operationalization of goodness-of-fit.
A very common indicator for goodness of fit is
R-squared, which can be casually defined as a fraction of the
variance of predicted outcome over
The various of the actual outcome in the data
If our model is a good fit of the data we have
Then the idea here is to see the fraction close to one so we can
say the model has done a good job explaining or accounting
for the outcome variable of interest.
Alternatively, we can also calculate the sum of squared
residues to see if the model performs well by reliably
predicting the actual values of our of convertible
which requires the residual of each observation or data point
to be as small as possible.
The least squares linear regression or OLS is known to
produce estimated coefficients for the intercept and slopes
that lead to the smallest sum of squared procedures. This is
where the name of least squares came from in the first
place.
So far we have used bivariate linear regression to go over
some of the key concepts and principles of linear regression
analysis, because many things we have learned so far can be
extended to multiple linear regression, which means linear
regression model including more than one predictor or
independent variable.
There is a number of additional notable distinctions between
bivariate and multiple linear regression, and I'm going to
discuss them more carefully here.
Again, multiple linear regression using the least squares has
become the most powerful regression technique,
as it provides us with the means to present and study
nuanced, complicated, interactive dynamics between different
predictors with respect to the outcome or dependent variables
of our interest.
We can formally or mathematically specify a
multiple linear regression in many different ways,
one of which requires some knowledge of calculus and linear
algebra. To simplify our
discussion here.
This is a quick
algebraic representation without using any complicated
mathematical notations and concepts.
The only notation that may look a little bit unfamiliar to you
is the subscript(s) attached to each predictor.
Here the number means different predictors. For instance, X one
means the first predictor and beta one is a slope or
regression coefficient associated with the first
predictor we have in the model.
For any regression coefficient, as I have explained
earlier,
They can be understood in many different ways, such as
forecasting, prediction, causation, correlation. Although the underlying idea of multiple
linear regression is not so different from bivariate linear
regression,
we still have to consider the meaning of slopes with a bit of
more caution.
Um, but I'm not intended to go over the formal definition in
detail, but here is the intuition.
In the case of multiple linear regression, given that we have
more than one slope, each estimated coefficient for a
corresponding slope should be understood as follows.
That is, we are using the estimated coefficient to study
the correlation between a given predictor and the outcome
variable
and at the same time, we are taking to account the
correlation and the impact of other competing arrival
predictors in relation to our outcome variable.
So to put this
in a more concrete way -- consider this example.
When we try to investigate the correlation between a
politician's perceived competence and their performance
in the elections -- say we want to include another predictor
in a model and this variable can be the economic situation of the
politicians constituency.
Once we include both predictors, then the estimate is
slope of the competence variable should be understood as a
correlation between competence and electric performance, and at
the same time we also consider the influence of economic
situation and these politicians constituency on the election
outcomes in our regression analysis.
It is very possible when we try to consider more than one
predictor, a politician's perceived competence will
have little to do with their performance in the elections.
A very similar concept you may have heard in other modules is
intersectionality because the underlying idea of
intersectionality is to say a person's race and gender can
have non trivial impact on their various outcomes
in the life.
So when we know it is possible to include more than one
predictors in the linear model, we will need to consider
two questions more carefully.
First, which variables we should include and how
these variables relate to each other in the model.
Many quantitative researchers dedicate their entire career to
studying the statistical techniques and tools of model
and the variable selection. Even though model comparison is
indeed a very important topic.
This will not be our focus here as model comparison techniques
often require more assumptions and subject to a lot of
debates, and you should have learned some of these techniques
in other modules already.
So whenever it comes to variable selection, the key thing is to
keep in mind
we should always avoid omitting or forgetting to include any
important predictors regarding the dependent variable of interest
because the result of doing so is our estimated coefficients can
become really small or become biased in terms of the size and
will no longer be statistically significant once we account for
other predictors. Quant scholars who focus on
statistical learning and causal inference have also proposed
some criteria for us to select the variables in the regression
model. And I'm going (or hoping) to talk more about this in the coming weeks.
As we include more than one variables in the linear
regression model, it is also very important we do not include two
predictors highly correlated with each other.
Because doing so will make
our estimated coefficients are misleading and unreliable. This
is something we call collinearity and we can use
variance inflation factor (VIF) as a possible benchmark to detect the
presence of collinearity in the model.
Or, we can just check the pairwise Pearson correlation of
all predictors. If two predictors are highly correlated with each
other, the usual practice is to drop one of them.
It is also very important to highlight, sometimes having more
predictors may artificially increase the value of R-squared
to the moment that R-squared can no longer serve as an informative
metric of model fit.
Adjusted R-squared is useful to address this issue because it
includes one additional term in the formula to penalize the
inclusion of too many variables in your model. In other words, if
we use adjusted R-squared, including more
predictors may in the end shrink the value of your R-squared and the
marginal utility of adding one additional predictor will
decline as you include more predictors.
The inclusion of more than one predictor in the model can also
allow us to model more complicated statistical
relationships, some of which can actually be nonlinear. More
specifically, we can try to model nonlinear data generation
process of our outcome variables by including the interaction
term or the polynomial term.
A linear function with interaction term will allow us
to introduce some dependency between different predictors, so
the estimated slope of one predictor can change under
different conditions. For instance, maybe the correlation
between political components and electric results will change
when we consider the industrial structure of a constituency
which can either be agricultural or industrial
There is a good example in a textbook for you to consider.
A linear function with polynomial terms basically
allows the predictor to have a nonlinear relationship with the
dependent variable, and you will see one example in the next
slide.
Here is one quick example of a linear function with quadratic
terms. In this case, we set the intercept at one and the slopes
of X and X-squared at two and 0.5 respectively.
Here's one interesting question you should ask for yourself.
If multiple linear regression allows us to include more
complicated and nuanced interactive dynamics between
different predictors, such that the statistical relationship
between predictors and the dependent variable
doesn't have to be linear, then why do we need generalized
linear model? Like logit? We can talk more about this when we see
each other in class, but we will address the issue in more detail
again in the coming weeks.
The hint is generalized linear model allows us to relax
more sanctions of OLS in addition to linearity
assumption.
So now this concludes our practical review of multiple
linear regression.
Again, multiple linear regression is a very convenient tool, but by
now I hope it should be clear to you: There is no guarantee that
our statistical analysis or our quant research will be a hundred
percent perfect or scientific.
Because regression analysis is really not a simple black and
white matter.
When we try to carry out the analysis, there will be many
decisions we have to responsibly make and many decisions we have
to make may not have a clear theoretical reason
underneath. Regardless of the model
or regression techniques we use, we are bound to take so many
assumptions and some of these assumptions can be controversial
and unrealistic.
And eventually doing quant social research were demand a solid
knowledge of the subject matter per se, which often can only be
obtained with high quality qualitative
research.
You need to come up with a good substantive reason for your
model setup, including the predictors you wish to include
and how this predictors will be combined to inform a reasonable
data generation process of the dependent variable.
In this slide,
I have already listed some principles or steps you can
take.I'm not going to read them out one by one, but the key lesson
is: Remember, there is no perfect model; nonetheless
knowing this by no means invalidates the analytical value
or need of using statistical models to understand the social
world.
Meanwhile, we should be prepared that any solid quantum research
will require us to use multiple statistical techniques based on
a good understanding of both quantitative and qualitative
social research.
A table with one regression model containing all predictors
would not get you very far.
I would like to end this review by quoting George box again.
All models are wrong, but some of them are useful, and the
statistical models are only approximations of real life.
This is Dr Chao-Yo Cheng. See you in class.
Uh huh.